Have you written your story?
Are you done?
Okay,
this will be your basis.
The storyline that you wrote
will be the basis for the play’s form.
So we’re just two steps away
before going into the actual
writing of the dialogue.
This is so it’s clear to you
what the conventional process is.
For beginners,
this is my recommendation.
At the least.
For more organized thoughts,
for a more organized story.
Or you could use a structure
in order to highlight
several emotional moments.
if that’s what you want as a writer.
When will your audience be moved?
When will they be hooked?
And how will you keep them
interested ‘til the end?
This is the difference of a storyline
with what you will be doing next,
which is called a scenario.
Its development
from story to scenario –
this is where your imagination
as a playwright comes in.
This is something
that will help mark your play.
Your story could be based
from real life or from a book.
The story may not be original,
but the difference
is in how you tell the story.
Of course, the most conventional story
originated from long ago.
That’s the classic,
standard way of telling a story.
From a long time ago.
Like this, and that.
But not all of our stories are legends.
We have different ways
of telling stories.
And sometimes
in telling these stories,
it somehow gives writers an idea
of the different styles that can be used
Should I tell the story through songs?
Then it’s a musical.
Through spoken word?
Will I tell the story
through different characters?
For example, instead of people
I’ll use animals to tell the story.
So I can show the savagery
in human beings.
So the content of the story
is integrated with how you tell the story.
Nowadays, we see a lot of films
that change or tweak stories.
For example, something
as simple as Snow White.
Instead of Snow White,
the story's about the witch.
Or in Sleeping Beauty's story
but the focus is on the queen witch.
Why did the queen witch
curse Sleeping Beauty?
So this is--
One way of tweaking a story
is by changing the story’s point of view.
By doing that, you’re changing
the conventional structure of the story.
You’re not changing
the actual story,
just looking at it
through a different lens.
And that’s part
of making the scenario.
In creating a scenario,
you have to decide:
Where do I start the story?
Do I start from the point
where my character is born?
Or do I start at that point
where she’s close
close to reaching what she wants?
But she’s already there
almost a step,
two steps away
from facing her rival.
You decide that.
This is what we call
choosing the point of attack.
It's not necessary
to start from the top
especially for one-act plays
or short plays
that have one setting
and need to end right away.
You won’t start this
at the lowest part of the story,
but at the highest part ,
near the climax of the story.
And after that,
in the course
of that short one-act play,
relevant parts
of the story should be told
for the audience
to understand what’s going on.
Usually, one-act plays
don’t start at the very beginning.
So there are different
ways of doing it,
especially the flavor.
This is where cooking comes in
how you cook
the adobo matters.
It has more ingredients.
At the same time,
the kare-kare is hyped.
There are different ways of cooking it.
Even when you look up a recipe,
There are different ways
of cooking the actual food.
It’s the same way
with cooking up a story.
But whatever happens,
the story will only end
when the conflict ends.
It’s so easy
to talk about it, right?
But there are times--
there are many writers
that don’t exactly know the conflict
and if it’ll end or not.
Sometimes, they have so much to say
that they end up unsure
as to how the play will end.
So there’s a huge difference
between the story and the plot.
You created the story
from the beginning.
CJ’s relationship with Mateo.
Masi with Dan.
Rob and Avic.
Enna and Cyril.
Or the mother and daughter.
Agapito Flores and Graham Bell.
They're not a pair, right?
You still have to look for it.
The problem is the character
or inventor who'll move the story forward.
For example, the inventor.
The inventor and the world.
It's so huge.
Which is why,
the smaller the problem,
the faster it is to resolve.
That’s what will also set
the length, depth,
and scope of the story.
There are also lengthy plays of course.
Other writers see that
tracking or chronicling the life
of a character lasts years.
Some of Bertolt Brecht’s plays
are good examples of this.
An example is his play “Galileo,”
which isn’t actually
about Galileo’s life.
Though a huge part of it
tackled 20 years, 25-30 years of his life
from his discovery
of the possibility
that it wasn't...
the sun and the planets
that orbited the earth.
The conclusion of the story
is his recantation
and declaration
that his discovery was wrong.
That was what
the whole play was about.
And it chronicled his life
until he was about 60 years old.
He didn't get what he want.
The character, Galileo,
compromised
and he was guilty of it.
He was aware
of that compromise.
When the battle ends,
when someone succeeds,
it doesn’t necessarily mean
that your character has to win.
Even when the conflict ends,
it’s possible to have no winners at all.
When the conflict is resolved,
it doesn’t mean
it has to end positively.
In “Mother Courage”,
it spanned for almost 30 years.
Mother Courage has three children.
In the duration of the play,
we see her children
die one by one.
The story’s that simple.
Actually, Mother Courage
sells war materials.
One of her children went to war
and became a soldier.
Her other child
became a treasurer in the army
And her mute child
saved a town by beating drums.
When that was done,
the play ended and she was alone.
That was the whole story of the play.
But it tackled a lot of themes
about war, business,
the integration of capitalism with war,
and why these are important
to discuss together
and not as separate issues.
And what its consequences
are to the people.
It talks about a lot,
but it’s just a story
about the family.
So if you notice,
a story can be simple,
but you can also elaborate it
through creating scenarios.
These scenarios are what
the audience will see onstage.
That’s what they’ll see.
It won’t be me
narrating my story to you.
pitching an important story.
This is more like, “Oh the story is good,
but how will we watch this?”
This is where we see
the skill of the playwright.
If the story is yours,
then you’re lucky
have a good story.
But how will you deliver the story?
This is where being
a playwright comes in.
Like what I said, the storytelling
is different when you write this in a book
or you made it a novel,
or as a short story
versus dramatizing it.
This is finally the mark
or demarcation where we’re entering
the first phase of actual playwriting.
This is where you check
every scene that’s needed
so you can tell
the story of your play,
introduce the main characters
and the support and bit roles
and put in the obstacles
at the right time,
since timing is important.
Now, there are different ways
of storytelling through chronology.
One example
is Harold Pinter’s play “Betrayal”
in which he reversed the chronology
of the story about an affair.
It started
at the end of the affair,
when the lovers are about to break up.
We follow the next scenes
going backwards in time
until we reach the last scene,
when the lovers first met
and had their first kiss.
The impact
is different
because
it’s clear that Harold Pinter’s intention
isn’t to make us giddy about the kiss,
but to show that
the kiss is the result of lust.
This is what’s called dramatic irony
and it's an important aspect
since the audience knows
they’ll split up in the end
because of the first act,
the impact is different.
So, of course, that’s a very, very,
very unique way of telling the story.
And like what I said,
you can only do
those kinds of tricks once.
But what a wonderful,
clever way to tell a story.
Because what’s important
isn’t just the story itself,
but how the playwright
plays with your perception.
What if you already know
what’s going to happen even before it starts?
You won’t just feel
love or giddiness,
but also sadness, and so on.
Those are what you have
to take into account when creating scenarios.
This is where what you want to say
comes in and how you’re going to tell the story.
We’re still at the level
where you’re touched with the material.
You just have to organize it
so it’s clearer
and to choose the character
that’ll move the
scenario forward.
This is how you’ll tell the story.
There are plays that
don’t have a clear structure,
but it actually does have one.
When I wrote the play
“Ralph and Claudia”
about the development
of a transgender person,
I was inspired
from a lot of sources.
Even with forming the structure.
The play originated
from an imaginary television interview
at a mountaintop in Batanes.
The interviewer is the protagonist
and he interviewed three
known legends, either mythical,
or a popular news item.
Nancy is a runner, an athlete
whose sexuality is doubted.
But she still joined
the women’s category.
Eventually, people found out
that she had hypospadias.
This means,
they couldn’t determine
what her sex organ is.
But then the committee decided
that Nancy was male
so she was disqualified.
My other play was inspired
from a Kung Fu film.
It’s about a guy who wants to be
the best Kung Fu master.
But in order to be a master
he has to sacrifice his genital
and become a woman.
This is from a Chinese
Kung Fu movie
and what I used for satire.
My third play
is about...
about...
a man being haunted
by an apartment ghost.
And he wants to know
if the ghost is a man or a woman
because he’s falling
in love with the ghost.
But the ghost
doesn’t want to reveal
if he’s a man or a woman.
That’s what the interview’s about.
After that scene,
we head over to the story
of the actual interviewer.
We go through his story
from being a man
to him thinking he was gay
until he finally realized
that he was a woman.
The interviewer
underwent sex change.
And when she changed her sex,
she then realized that she liked women.
And so she ended up
becoming a transexual lesbian.
The interviewer experienced
the boy, girl, lesbian, and gay stereotypes.
But if you watch it,
you might end up asking,
“Where’s the structure?”
In fact,
that’s what I feel is the structure.
I decided to start
with the interviewer’s imagination.
And then
I chose four scenes
in which he had different identities.
It was a risk,
if the audience
would understand it or not.
When it was shown,
people didn’t understand.
But I felt vindicated in a way,
because the one person
who understood it was a woman,
who isn't a member of the LGBT.
This is one example
in choosing a structure
or choosing a scenario.
Changing partners is a device –
a structuring device.
When you watch the play,
the characters change
but the story's still the same.
A story may be very conventional
like a story of lovers
who break up
except when they change the characters
as though they were different
but are actually the same.
That’s what I’m talking about,
That’s the mark of the writer.
That’s what makes it different,
That’s what makes it unique,
that’s what makes it yours.
That’s your biggest input
about the theme
because themes are very generic.
Love,
justice, freedom.
A play could have
just one scene
for two hours.
It’s possible, right?
Or there could be a lot of scenes,
especially now, with the
modern way of having simultaneous
scenes or split scnes split scenes
that they could’ve
gotten from cinema.
That wasn’t a thing back then.
So there’s a lot of devices now,
possibly originating  from films.
An example is the flashback.
Before cinema,
I don't know any play
that used flashbacks.
The past always used to be narrated,
but because of flashbacks,
Arthur Miller was able to create
“The Death of the Salesman.”
I could be wrong,
but it’s kind of like that.
Other cinematic devices
carried over like that in theater.